a carcass
will attract every big predator for
miles around
[Music]
attracted to the feast
it is more than capable of challenging
for the carcass
[Music]
[Applause]
majungasaurus has short arms and can't
grasp
tyrannosaurs it's all about the bite
[Music]
the shape of majungasaura's skull and
teeth suggests a very different biting
style to the flesh-tearing dinosaurs
with a broad short and muscular skull
it was a dino better adapted to biting
and gripping rather than slashing its
prey
this fight is about more than just
winning the feeding rights to a carcass
[Music]
when the bite marks on the mall
majungasaurus remains were studied more
closely
the marks on the bones were found to
match the only large
carnivore in the region there is no
bigger killer in these lands than
majungasaurus
this is the first irrefutable evidence
of dinosaur cannibalism
[Music]
it might seem shocking but it's a
behavior that clearly shows the most
successful killers will exploit any
situation to their maximum advantage
a time when both egg and the brooding
parent are permanently at risk
[Music]
smaller oviraptors are no more than a
nuisance
larger predators are a different story
unwilling to leave the nest the adult
protects its offspring
first by hiding
and if that fails it goes on the
offensive
[Music]
so
protecting the nest means gigantoraptors
young are more likely to survive
it now seems clear that the instinct to
nurture and care for a nest of eggs
had its origins with the dinosaurs
it's a behavior that was so successful
it's still
widespread today with birds
but the fossils show something else
these animals
all died sitting on their nests
it seems that the threats don't always
come from predators
sometimes the real danger comes from the
most unlikely places
[Music]
these dinosaurs were all buried alive
spinosaurus is a predator but one that
hunts in water
it's ixyophagus a fish eater
this is ankapristis
[Music]
an eight meter long giant sawfish
similar to those alive today
the saw like rostrum is lined with
lethal barbs
and is in itself up to two and a half
meters in length
it's thought they migrated into
freshwater rivers to breed
where the young may be safer but the
adults are exposed to new threats
[Music]
with their breeding season at its height
these rivers are
filled with ankapristis it's the perfect
hunting opportunity for spinosaurus
[Music]
spirosaurus's conical teeth evolve to
grip prey
rather than tear off flesh
for that it needs powerful arms and
claws
with prey plentiful spinosaurus can
afford to be wasteful
a fact which other dinosaurs take full
advantage of
rugops an eight meter carnivore
anywhere else it might dominate
but here it is dwarfed by spinosaurus
spinosaurus is unique with long
narrow jaws and nostrils set high on its
head
its teeth were straight and conical
they gave us a clue as to how it killed
more evidence came in 2008 when
spinosaurus skull was put through a ct
scanner
it revealed a curious pattern of holes
and sinuses in the snout
that look just like those of crocodiles
it's thought these contain pressure
sensors
sensors that like a crocodile can detect
prey
making it perfectly adapted to hunting
in water
[Music]
this discovery gives us our best
evidence of exactly how it hunted
able to hold its snout in the water
because of its high nostrils
it can strike without even seeing its
[Music]
prey
hunting on land spinosaurus is also
forced into direct competition with any
large predators living in the same
environment
and here that can only mean one animal
[Music]
soros
contests over carcasses are common
but outcomes of such fights are far from
guaranteed
risk of injury for big animals is acute
modern komodo dragons are often killed
in fights over carcasses
more than three meters longer
spinosaurus has size and power on its
side
[Music]
but carcaradontosaurus has the more
lethal bite
[Music]
this time the spinosaurus triumphed
but the balance of power between these
two deadly killers is a precarious one
[Music]
in 2008 a spinosaurus vertebrae was
recovered
part of the tall neural spine of the
bone was broken off
it appeared to have been bitten in half
it's been suggested that the bite was
inflicted by carcaladontosaurus
spinosaurus was the last and the largest
of the fish-eating dinosaurs
but ultimately these specialists were
doomed
something way beyond their control
caused their downfall
94 million years ago the climate changed
global sea levels began to rise the
swamps and rivers that spinosaurus
thrived
in gradually were lost
[Music]
with their loss spinosaurus's specialism
became a vulnerability
[Music]
and the biggest predator ever known to
have walked the earth
[Music]
disappeared
but first impressions can be deceptive
this isn't the parent this
is a scorpio veneta a predator
[Music]
the skeleton found at the nest site was
almost certainly a nest raider
preying on the hatchlings
the hatchlings real parent and the owner
of the enormous vertebra
is argentina suarez
a plant-eating giant that dwarfs
everything around it
from the bones that were found we've
calculated that argentinosaurus
was a colossal 35 meters long and
weighed as much as 75
tons
[Music]
when born the hatchlings themselves
weigh a paltry 5 kilograms
and need to fend for themselves
[Music]
immediately
from studying the embryos and looking at
the bones of the adults
we know that the growth of these giants
was phenomenal
[Music]
over 40 years they grow from 5 kilograms
to an
astonishing 75 000 kilograms
at their peak it's been calculated they
grow up to
40 kilograms every day
the dinosaur embryos are so well
preserved we can see they already have
their teeth
in preparation for a lifetime of eating
but becoming a giant takes more than
simply turning
tons of food into muscle
it's about the success and survival of a
species over millions of years
one way to increase the chances of
survival is by having lots of offspring
and the best way to do that is by laying
eggs
lots of them
the nest site in patagonia stretches for
an astonishing
15 kilometers and contains tens of
thousands of eggs
and the site was used continuously for
hundreds of thousands of years
[Music]
you